Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the adrenal glands.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the anatomy and the hormones of the adrenal glands.
The adrenal glands are paired endocrine glands,
each in effect two glands in one — a cortex and a medulla — with different origins,
hormones and functions, and an understanding of this organisation is the foundation
of the subject, so it is worth setting out.
There are two adrenal glands, one above each kidney,
and each consists of two distinct parts. The outer part, the adrenal cortex,
makes up the bulk of the gland; it is a true endocrine gland of glandular tissue,
and it secretes steroid hormones, made from cholesterol.
The cortex is arranged in three zones, which produce three classes of steroid:
the outer zone produces the mineralocorticoids, chiefly aldosterone,
regulating salt and water; the middle zone produces the glucocorticoids,
chiefly cortisol, with metabolic and other actions;
and the inner zone produces the adrenal androgens, the sex steroids.
The inner part, the adrenal medulla, is quite different: it is,
as we discussed with the autonomic system, a modified sympathetic ganglion,
of nervous origin, and it secretes the catecholamines — adrenaline and
noradrenaline — into the blood as hormones, as part of the sympathetic response.
So the two parts have separate controls and functions.
So each adrenal gland consists of the cortex — a steroid-secreting gland in three
zones, producing the mineralocorticoids such as aldosterone,
the glucocorticoids such as cortisol, and the adrenal androgens — and the medulla,
a modified sympathetic ganglion secreting the catecholamines adrenaline and
noradrenaline into the blood; two glands in one, with different origins,
hormones and functions.
Describe the synthesis and control of cortisol.
Cortisol, the principal glucocorticoid,
is a vital hormone whose secretion is controlled by the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, and an understanding of its control,
including its rhythm and its response to stress, is fundamental,
so it is worth describing.
Cortisol is a steroid hormone, synthesised from cholesterol in the middle zone of
the adrenal cortex, and, being a steroid, made on demand rather than stored,
and carried in the blood bound to a binding protein.
Its secretion is controlled by the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis:
the hypothalamus secretes corticotropin-releasing hormone,
which stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete adrenocorticotropic hormone,
which stimulates the adrenal cortex to make and secrete cortisol;
and the cortisol exerts negative feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary,
holding its level regulated.
Two features of its control are important. First,
it is secreted with a marked circadian rhythm,
the level being highest in the early morning and lowest at night,
driven by the body clock acting on the axis.
Second, and crucially, its secretion is greatly increased by stress — physical and
psychological stress, including injury, illness, surgery and anaesthesia — which,
through the brain, activates the axis to increase the cortisol,
as part of the body's response to stress.
So cortisol, a steroid made on demand in the adrenal cortex,
is controlled by the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis — corticotropin-releasing
hormone driving adrenocorticotropic hormone, which drives cortisol,
with negative feedback; secreted with a circadian rhythm,
highest in the early morning; and greatly increased by stress,
including surgery and illness — a control fundamental to its function,
including the stress response.
Describe the actions of cortisol and the glucocorticoids.
Cortisol has widespread and important actions,
on metabolism and on many other systems,
essential to the body's function and especially to the response to stress,
and knowing these is important, as they underlie both its physiological role and
the effects of glucocorticoid drugs.
Cortisol, a glucocorticoid, acts, like other steroids,
on intracellular receptors to alter gene expression, with effects on most tissues.
Its metabolic actions, reflected in its name,
tend to raise the blood glucose and provide fuel:
it stimulates the production of glucose by the liver — gluconeogenesis — and
mobilises the substrates for this, breaking down protein and fat;
it thus has a catabolic, glucose-raising effect, and opposes insulin.
It is essential, in a permissive way,
for the normal function of the cardiovascular system,
maintaining the vascular tone and the responsiveness to catecholamines,
so that its lack causes cardiovascular collapse.
It has important anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive actions — the basis of the
wide therapeutic use of glucocorticoid drugs.
It has effects on many other systems, and on mood.
Crucially, it is central to the response to stress,
mobilising the body's resources to cope with injury and illness;
an adequate cortisol response is necessary for survival of severe stress.
So cortisol acts through intracellular receptors on most tissues:
raising the blood glucose by gluconeogenesis and the mobilisation of substrates,
opposing insulin; permissively maintaining cardiovascular function and the response
to catecholamines; exerting anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects — the
basis of glucocorticoid drugs; and being central to the response to stress —
widespread actions essential to the body and underlying the use of glucocorticoid
drugs.
Describe aldosterone and its control.
Aldosterone, the principal mineralocorticoid,
is the main hormone regulating sodium and potassium balance,
and its control — differing from that of cortisol — is important,
so it is worth describing.
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone, secreted by the outer zone of the adrenal cortex.
Its principal action is on the kidney, where, as discussed in the renal physiology,
it acts on the distal nephron to increase the reabsorption of sodium and,
coupled to this, the secretion of potassium and hydrogen ions;
so it promotes sodium retention and potassium loss,
and is the main hormonal regulator of sodium balance and so of the extracellular
fluid volume, and an important regulator of potassium.
Its control differs from that of cortisol:
although it is made in the adrenal cortex,
it is regulated only slightly by the adrenocorticotropic hormone of the pituitary
axis, and chiefly by other factors.
The principal controls are: the renin-angiotensin system — a fall in the blood
volume or pressure, or in the sodium delivery, activating renin,
generating angiotensin, which stimulates aldosterone secretion;
and the plasma potassium — a rise in the plasma potassium directly stimulating
aldosterone, which then promotes its excretion.
So aldosterone is regulated mainly by the volume and potassium status,
appropriately to its functions.
So aldosterone, the mineralocorticoid from the outer adrenal cortex,
acts on the kidney to increase sodium reabsorption and potassium and hydrogen
secretion — the main regulator of sodium balance and extracellular volume and a
regulator of potassium; controlled not chiefly by the pituitary but by the
renin-angiotensin system, responding to volume and pressure,
and by the plasma potassium — a control matched to its functions in volume and
potassium balance.
Describe the hormones and function of the adrenal medulla.
The adrenal medulla is the hormonal arm of the sympathetic nervous system,
releasing catecholamines into the blood,
and although we touched on it in the autonomic physiology,
it is worth describing here as the second part of the adrenal gland.
The adrenal medulla is, in effect, a modified sympathetic ganglion:
its cells are the equivalent of postganglionic sympathetic neurons,
but instead of innervating effectors,
they secrete their products into the blood as hormones;
like the sympathetic ganglia, the medulla is supplied by preganglionic sympathetic
fibres, which release acetylcholine onto nicotinic receptors to stimulate secretion.
The medulla secretes the catecholamines — chiefly adrenaline,
with some noradrenaline — into the bloodstream.
These circulate and act on the adrenoceptors throughout the body,
producing the effects of sympathetic stimulation — on the heart, the circulation,
the bronchi, and metabolism — reinforcing and prolonging the effects of the
sympathetic nerves and reaching tissues not directly innervated.
The medulla is activated as part of the sympathetic response to stress, exertion,
fear and emergency — the fight-or-flight response — so the neural and the hormonal
sympathetic outputs act together.
A tumour of the medulla, a phaeochromocytoma, secretes excess catecholamines,
causing severe hypertension, and is of great anaesthetic importance.
So the adrenal medulla, a modified sympathetic ganglion supplied by preganglionic
fibres, secretes the catecholamines — chiefly adrenaline — into the blood,
which act on adrenoceptors throughout the body to produce the sympathetic effects,
reinforcing the sympathetic nerves and activated in stress as part of the
fight-or-flight response; a catecholamine-secreting tumour, the phaeochromocytoma,
being of great anaesthetic importance — the hormonal arm of the sympathetic system.
Describe the features and anaesthetic importance of adrenocortical insufficiency.
Adrenocortical insufficiency — a deficiency of the adrenal cortical hormones,
particularly cortisol — is a dangerous condition of great anaesthetic importance,
because the cortisol response is essential to surviving the stress of surgery,
so it is worth describing.
Adrenocortical insufficiency is a lack of the adrenal cortical hormones.
It may be primary, from disease of the adrenal glands themselves,
in which both cortisol and aldosterone are deficient; or secondary,
from a lack of the pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone that drives the cortex —
importantly, this includes the suppression of the axis by prolonged treatment with
glucocorticoid drugs, which is common.
The features of cortisol deficiency reflect the loss of its actions: weakness,
fatigue, weight loss, and a tendency to hypoglycaemia; and, critically,
an impaired cardiovascular function, with hypotension,
because cortisol is needed permissively for the vascular tone and the response to
catecholamines.
In primary insufficiency, the aldosterone deficiency adds sodium loss,
hypovolaemia and hyperkalaemia.
The great danger, of anaesthetic importance, is the adrenal, or Addisonian, crisis:
because cortisol secretion must rise greatly to meet stress,
a patient with insufficiency — or with a suppressed axis from steroid treatment —
cannot mount this response to the stress of surgery, and may suffer a crisis,
with profound hypotension and cardiovascular collapse.
This is prevented by giving supplementary steroid to cover the stress of surgery.
So adrenocortical insufficiency, primary or secondary — including from
steroid-suppressed axes — causes weakness, hypoglycaemia and, critically,
hypotension from the loss of cortisol's permissive cardiovascular role,
with sodium loss in primary disease;
its great anaesthetic danger being the inability to mount the cortisol response to
surgical stress, risking an adrenal crisis with cardiovascular collapse,
prevented by supplementary steroid cover — a condition of major anaesthetic
importance.
Describe Cushing's syndrome and the effects of glucocorticoid excess.
An excess of glucocorticoid — Cushing's syndrome — produces a characteristic
clinical picture following from the actions of cortisol, and it is important,
particularly as it commonly results from the therapeutic use of steroids,
so it is worth describing as the counterpart of insufficiency.
Cushing's syndrome is the clinical state resulting from a chronic excess of
glucocorticoid.
It may arise from an excess of cortisol produced by the body — from a pituitary
tumour secreting adrenocorticotropic hormone, an adrenal tumour,
or other sources — or, very commonly,
from the administration of glucocorticoid drugs in treatment.
The features follow from the exaggerated actions of cortisol:
the metabolic effects produce a raised blood glucose, even diabetes,
and a characteristic redistribution of fat, with central obesity,
a rounded face and a fat pad on the back,
while the catabolic effects waste the muscles and thin the skin and bones,
causing weakness, easy bruising, poor healing, and osteoporosis;
the mineralocorticoid-like effects at high levels cause sodium retention,
hypertension and potassium loss; and there are effects on mood,
and an immunosuppression increasing susceptibility to infection.
The anaesthetic considerations include the hypertension, the diabetes,
the obesity and its airway and respiratory implications,
the fragile skin and tissues, the osteoporosis,
and the suppression of the patient's own adrenal axis by the excess,
requiring steroid cover.
So Cushing's syndrome, from endogenous cortisol excess or, commonly,
glucocorticoid drugs, causes a raised blood glucose,
central obesity with the characteristic appearance, muscle wasting,
thin skin and osteoporosis, hypertension and sodium retention,
and immunosuppression; its anaesthetic considerations including the hypertension,
diabetes, obesity, fragile tissues and the need for steroid cover — the counterpart
of adrenal insufficiency, following from the actions of cortisol.
Pull it together: how do the adrenal glands contribute to homeostasis and the
stress response?
I would draw the adrenal glands together around their central role in homeostasis
and, above all, in the response to stress — two glands in one,
whose hormones are essential to survival,
particularly of the stressed and the surgical patient.
The adrenal cortex, through its steroids,
contributes to several homeostatic functions: aldosterone,
controlled by the renin-angiotensin system and the potassium,
regulates the sodium and potassium balance and so the extracellular volume;
the adrenal androgens contribute the sex steroids.
But its central contribution, through cortisol,
is to metabolism and to the stress response:
cortisol maintains the blood glucose and the metabolic fuel supply,
permissively supports the cardiovascular function, and, crucially,
its secretion rises greatly in response to stress — injury,
illness and surgery — mobilising the body's resources to cope.
The adrenal medulla, the hormonal arm of the sympathetic system, complements this,
releasing the catecholamines in stress to support the circulation and mobilise
energy in the fight-or-flight response. The two parts thus act together in stress.
The clinical importance is shown by the disorders:
the danger of an adrenal crisis when the cortisol response fails,
of major anaesthetic importance; and the syndromes of excess.
So the adrenal glands contribute to homeostasis — aldosterone regulating salt,
water and potassium — and, centrally, to the stress response:
cortisol maintaining the blood glucose and cardiovascular function and rising
greatly to meet stress, and the medullary catecholamines supporting the circulation
and energy in the fight-or-flight response;
their hormones essential to surviving stress and surgery,
the failure of the cortisol response being a major anaesthetic danger — the adrenal
glands central to homeostasis and the stress response.
Describe the synthesis of the adrenal steroid hormones from cholesterol.
All the steroid hormones of the adrenal cortex are made from cholesterol by a
series of enzymatic steps, and an understanding of this shared pathway is useful,
as it explains the production of the different steroids and the basis of certain
disorders and drugs.
The adrenal cortical hormones — the mineralocorticoids,
glucocorticoids and androgens — are all steroids, derived from a common precursor,
cholesterol, by a series of enzymatic modifications.
The pathway branches: cholesterol is converted, through common early steps,
into intermediates, which are then directed down different routes by particular
enzymes to form the three classes of steroid.
The zone of the cortex determines which steroids are made,
because the zones contain different enzymes:
the outer zone has the enzymes to make aldosterone; the middle zone,
those to make cortisol; and the inner zone, those for the androgens.
This shared pathway has several implications.
A deficiency of one of the enzymes — a congenital adrenal hyperplasia — blocks the
pathway at a point, reducing the steroids beyond the block and diverting the
precursors into the other pathways,
causing a characteristic pattern of deficiency and excess.
Certain drugs inhibit steps in the synthesis, used to reduce steroid production.
So the adrenal cortical steroids — mineralocorticoids,
glucocorticoids and androgens — are all synthesised from cholesterol by a branching
series of enzymatic steps, the zone determining which steroids are made through its
particular enzymes; a deficiency of an enzyme, in congenital adrenal hyperplasia,
blocking the pathway and diverting precursors to cause a pattern of deficiency and
excess, and certain drugs inhibiting the synthesis — a shared pathway explaining
the production of the steroids and the basis of certain disorders and drugs.
Describe the circadian rhythm of cortisol and its significance.
Cortisol is secreted with a marked daily rhythm,
and an understanding of this circadian pattern is important,
both physiologically and for the interpretation of cortisol measurements and the
timing of steroid treatment, so it is worth describing.
The secretion of cortisol is not constant but follows a circadian rhythm,
driven by the body clock acting on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis:
the secretion, and so the plasma cortisol, is highest in the early morning,
around the time of waking, and falls through the day to its lowest in the late
evening and early night, before rising again towards morning.
This rhythm is superimposed on a pulsatile secretion.
Its significance is several-fold. Physiologically,
the morning peak prepares the body for the activity of the day.
For the interpretation of measurements,
the level must be related to the time of day — a level normal in the morning would
be abnormal at night — and the loss of the normal rhythm,
with a failure of the level to fall at night, is a feature of cortisol excess,
used in its diagnosis.
For treatment, the rhythm informs the timing of glucocorticoid replacement,
given to mimic the natural pattern,
and the rhythm is disturbed by illness and by exogenous steroids.
So cortisol is secreted with a circadian rhythm,
highest in the early morning and lowest at night,
driven by the body clock on the axis;
its significance being the preparation for the day's activity,
the need to interpret cortisol levels by the time of day,
the loss of the rhythm in cortisol excess used in diagnosis,
and the timing of replacement to mimic the natural pattern — a rhythm of
physiological and clinical importance.
Describe the metabolic actions of cortisol in detail.
Cortisol's name — a glucocorticoid — reflects its central metabolic action of
raising the blood glucose, and a fuller account of its metabolic effects is worth
giving, as they are important physiologically and underlie features of its excess
and deficiency.
Cortisol has metabolic actions that, broadly,
mobilise the body's energy stores and raise the blood glucose — making fuel
available, an appropriate response to stress.
On glucose, it raises the blood glucose:
it stimulates the liver to produce glucose,
by gluconeogenesis — the making of new glucose from other substrates — and it
reduces the uptake and use of glucose by some peripheral tissues;
so it is a glucose-raising, counter-regulatory hormone, opposing insulin.
To supply the substrates for this glucose production, it has catabolic actions:
it promotes the breakdown of protein, particularly in muscle,
releasing amino acids; and it promotes the breakdown and mobilisation of fat,
releasing fatty acids, while causing a redistribution of fat.
So its overall metabolic effect is catabolic and glucose-raising.
These actions are valuable in stress and fasting, ensuring a fuel supply,
particularly of glucose for the brain.
But in chronic excess, as in Cushing's syndrome or steroid treatment,
the exaggerated actions cause the raised blood glucose and even diabetes,
the muscle wasting, and the redistribution of fat; and in deficiency,
the tendency to hypoglycaemia.
So cortisol's metabolic actions mobilise energy and raise the blood glucose:
stimulating hepatic gluconeogenesis and reducing peripheral glucose use,
opposing insulin; and, to supply the substrates,
breaking down protein in muscle and mobilising fat — a catabolic,
glucose-raising effect valuable in stress and fasting;
its chronic excess causing hyperglycaemia, muscle wasting and fat redistribution,
and its deficiency hypoglycaemia.
Describe the permissive and anti-inflammatory actions of cortisol.
Besides its metabolic actions, cortisol has crucial permissive effects on the
cardiovascular system and powerful anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive actions,
and these are worth describing, as they explain the danger of cortisol deficiency
and the wide use of glucocorticoid drugs.
Cortisol has a permissive action on the cardiovascular system:
it is required for the normal functioning of the circulation — for the maintenance
of the vascular tone and the responsiveness of the heart and vessels to the
catecholamines; it does not itself drive the circulation,
but its presence is necessary for these to work normally.
The consequence is that, in cortisol deficiency,
the cardiovascular system fails — with hypotension and a poor response to
catecholamines, and the risk of cardiovascular collapse — which is the danger of an
adrenal crisis.
Cortisol also has powerful anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive actions:
it suppresses the inflammatory response and the immune system at many points,
reducing inflammation and immune activity.
Physiologically, this restrains and modulates the inflammatory and immune
responses, preventing them from becoming excessive.
Therapeutically, this is the basis of the wide use of glucocorticoid drugs,
in high doses, to suppress inflammation and immune reactions in a great range of
conditions — though at the cost of the side effects of glucocorticoid excess and
the suppression of immunity.
So cortisol has a permissive action on the cardiovascular system,
being required for the normal vascular tone and the response to catecholamines — so
its deficiency causes hypotension and collapse — and powerful anti-inflammatory and
immunosuppressive actions, physiologically restraining the inflammatory and immune
responses and, therapeutically, the basis of the wide use of glucocorticoid drugs;
actions explaining the danger of cortisol deficiency and the use of steroids.
Describe perioperative steroid cover and its rationale.
The patient with adrenal insufficiency,
or whose adrenal axis is suppressed by steroid treatment,
requires supplementary steroid to cover the stress of surgery,
and the rationale for this follows directly from the role of cortisol in the stress
response, so it is worth describing.
The rationale rests on two facts. First,
the secretion of cortisol normally rises greatly in response to the stress of
surgery, and this increased cortisol is necessary to cope with that stress —
particularly to maintain the cardiovascular function.
Second, a patient who cannot mount this response — because of adrenal
insufficiency, or because their axis is suppressed and unresponsive from prolonged
glucocorticoid treatment, which is common — is at risk,
when subjected to the stress of surgery, of an adrenal crisis:
a failure to produce the needed cortisol,
with profound hypotension and cardiovascular collapse, which can be fatal.
So such patients are given supplementary steroid — steroid cover — around the time
of surgery, to provide the cortisol they cannot themselves produce,
in doses reflecting the magnitude of the surgical stress,
and then reduced as the stress passes.
Identifying the at-risk patient is important:
those with known adrenal insufficiency, and those on, or recently on,
significant doses of glucocorticoid, whose axis may be suppressed.
So perioperative steroid cover is given because the cortisol secretion normally
rises greatly to meet surgical stress,
and a patient who cannot mount this — from adrenal insufficiency or a
steroid-suppressed axis — is at risk of an adrenal crisis with cardiovascular
collapse; so supplementary steroid is given around surgery,
in doses reflecting the surgical stress,
to the at-risk patient — a practice following directly from the role of cortisol in
the stress response.
Describe the phaeochromocytoma and its anaesthetic management.
A phaeochromocytoma is a catecholamine-secreting tumour,
usually of the adrenal medulla, of great anaesthetic importance because of the
dangers it poses during surgery, and its understanding follows from the actions of
the catecholamines, so it is worth describing.
A phaeochromocytoma is a tumour of the chromaffin cells,
usually of the adrenal medulla, which secretes catecholamines — adrenaline and
noradrenaline — often in large amounts and episodically.
The excess catecholamines cause the features: a severe hypertension,
which may be sustained or paroxysmal, with episodes of severe hypertension,
and the symptoms of catecholamine excess — headache, sweating, palpitations,
pallor — and the cardiovascular consequences.
Its anaesthetic importance is great, because the surgery to remove it,
and anaesthesia in an unprepared patient,
can provoke a massive release of catecholamines, causing dangerous,
life-threatening surges of hypertension and arrhythmias — and,
after the tumour's removal, the sudden withdrawal of the catecholamines can cause
profound hypotension.
The key to safe management is careful preoperative preparation:
the patient is treated, in advance,
with drugs that block the effects of the catecholamines — alpha-blockade to control
the vasoconstriction and hypertension, established first,
with beta-blockade added if needed for the heart rate — and the circulating volume
restored, over a period before surgery; this prevents the dangerous swings.
During surgery, the blood pressure is managed carefully through the catecholamine
surges of tumour handling and the hypotension after its removal.
So a phaeochromocytoma is a catecholamine-secreting tumour,
usually of the adrenal medulla, causing severe sustained or paroxysmal hypertension
and the features of catecholamine excess;
of great anaesthetic importance because surgery can provoke life-threatening
catecholamine surges, and removal a profound hypotension;
managed by careful preoperative alpha- then beta-blockade and volume restoration,
and careful intraoperative control of the blood pressure — following from the
actions of the catecholamines.
Describe the adrenal androgens and an outline of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
The inner zone of the adrenal cortex produces androgens, the adrenal sex steroids,
and the disorder of congenital adrenal hyperplasia illustrates the consequences of
disturbing the steroid pathway, so an outline is worth giving.
The inner zone of the adrenal cortex produces the adrenal androgens — weak male sex
steroids — which contribute to the sex-steroid effects,
more significantly in the female, in whom they are a source of androgens,
and at certain life stages.
Their excess or deficiency causes androgenic effects.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is a group of inherited disorders in which an enzyme
of the adrenal steroid pathway is deficient;
the commonest form involves an enzyme needed to make cortisol and aldosterone.
The consequences follow from the shared pathway:
the deficiency reduces the cortisol; the low cortisol releases the feedback,
so the pituitary drives the adrenal hard with increased adrenocorticotropic
hormone, causing the adrenal to enlarge — the hyperplasia; and the precursors,
accumulating before the block, are diverted into the androgen pathway,
which is intact, causing an overproduction of androgens.
So the picture is of cortisol, and often aldosterone, deficiency,
with androgen excess — the androgen excess causing virilising effects,
and the cortisol and aldosterone deficiency causing the features of those,
including, in the severe form, a salt-losing crisis in infancy.
It is treated by replacing the deficient steroids, which also,
by restoring the feedback, reduces the excess drive and androgens.
So the adrenal androgens are weak sex steroids from the inner cortex;
and congenital adrenal hyperplasia is an inherited deficiency of a steroid-pathway
enzyme, reducing cortisol — which releases the feedback,
driving adrenal hyperplasia — and diverting precursors to overproduce androgens;
causing cortisol and often aldosterone deficiency with androgen excess and
virilisation, treated by replacing the deficient steroids — illustrating the
consequences of disturbing the steroid pathway.
Describe the assessment of adrenal function.
The assessment of adrenal function rests on measuring the adrenal hormones and on
dynamic tests that exploit the feedback control of the axis,
and an outline is worth giving, following from the control of cortisol.
The assessment differs for suspected deficiency and excess.
For suspected cortisol deficiency — adrenal insufficiency — the cortisol is
measured, ideally in the morning when it should be high;
a clearly low level suggests deficiency and a clearly high one excludes it.
Because a single level may be equivocal, a dynamic test is used:
the response of the cortisol to stimulation by synthetic adrenocorticotropic
hormone is measured — a normal rise excludes adrenal insufficiency,
while a failure to respond indicates it.
The adrenocorticotropic hormone level distinguishes primary adrenal disease,
in which it is high as the feedback is released, from secondary pituitary failure,
in which it is low.
For suspected cortisol excess — Cushing's syndrome — the approach is to demonstrate
the excess and the loss of the normal control: by showing a raised cortisol output,
a loss of the normal circadian fall at night, and, characteristically,
a failure of the cortisol to be suppressed by a dose of a synthetic glucocorticoid
— the dexamethasone suppression test — since the normal feedback suppression is
lost.
The adrenocorticotropic hormone and further tests then localise the cause.
So adrenal function is assessed by measuring the hormones and by dynamic tests:
for deficiency, the cortisol and its response to adrenocorticotropic hormone
stimulation, with the adrenocorticotropic hormone distinguishing primary from
secondary; and for excess, the demonstration of a raised cortisol,
lost circadian rhythm and failure of dexamethasone suppression — tests following
from the feedback control of the cortisol axis.
Describe the regulation of aldosterone secretion in more detail.
Aldosterone, the principal mineralocorticoid,
is regulated differently from cortisol,
chiefly by the renin-angiotensin system and the potassium,
and a fuller account of this control is worth giving,
as it underlies the regulation of sodium, volume and potassium.
Although aldosterone is a steroid of the adrenal cortex, it is, unlike cortisol,
only weakly dependent on the pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone,
and is controlled chiefly by two other influences,
matched to its functions in volume and potassium balance.
The first, and principal, is the renin-angiotensin system.
A fall in the blood volume or pressure, or in the sodium delivery to the kidney,
is sensed by the kidney, which releases the enzyme renin;
renin generates angiotensin, which, besides its other actions,
strongly stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone.
So a fall in volume leads, through this system, to aldosterone,
which acts on the kidney to retain sodium and so water, restoring the volume.
The second is the plasma potassium:
a rise in the plasma potassium directly stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete
aldosterone, which then acts on the kidney to excrete potassium, lowering it.
So aldosterone is regulated by the very things it controls — the volume and the
potassium — in negative feedback.
So aldosterone is regulated chiefly by the renin-angiotensin system — a fall in
volume or pressure releasing renin, generating angiotensin,
which stimulates aldosterone to retain sodium and restore volume — and by the
plasma potassium, a rise directly stimulating aldosterone to excrete potassium;
controlled by the variables it regulates, in negative feedback,
rather than chiefly by the pituitary — a control matched to its functions in volume
and potassium balance.
Describe primary hyperaldosteronism.
Primary hyperaldosteronism, an excess of aldosterone arising from the adrenal gland
itself, is an important and increasingly-recognised cause of hypertension,
and its understanding follows from the actions of aldosterone,
so it is worth describing.
Primary hyperaldosteronism is an autonomous excess secretion of aldosterone,
arising from a disorder of the adrenal cortex itself — an aldosterone-producing
adenoma, or an enlargement of both adrenals — rather than as an appropriate
response to the renin-angiotensin system; indeed, the excess aldosterone,
by expanding the volume, suppresses the renin.
The consequences follow from the actions of aldosterone — sodium retention and
potassium loss.
The sodium retention, with the consequent volume expansion,
raises the blood pressure, causing hypertension — the principal feature;
primary hyperaldosteronism is now recognised as a significant and treatable cause
of hypertension, present in a proportion of hypertensive patients.
The potassium loss may cause a hypokalaemia, with its features,
though the potassium is not always low. There is a tendency to a metabolic
alkalosis.
The condition is suspected in hypertension, particularly with hypokalaemia,
and confirmed by demonstrating the raised aldosterone with a suppressed renin.
It is treated by removing an adenoma,
or with drugs that block the aldosterone receptor.
So primary hyperaldosteronism is an autonomous excess of aldosterone from the
adrenal — an adenoma or bilateral enlargement — suppressing renin;
causing sodium retention with volume expansion and hypertension,
an important treatable cause of hypertension,
with potassium loss and a tendency to hypokalaemia and alkalosis;
confirmed by a raised aldosterone with suppressed renin,
and treated by removing an adenoma or blocking the aldosterone receptor — following
from the actions of aldosterone.
Describe the causes and distinction of primary and secondary adrenal insufficiency.
Adrenal insufficiency may arise from disease of the adrenal glands themselves or
from a lack of the pituitary drive,
and distinguishing these — primary and secondary — is important,
as they differ in their features and management, so it is worth describing.
In primary adrenal insufficiency, the disorder is in the adrenal glands themselves,
which fail to produce their hormones;
the commonest cause is autoimmune destruction of the adrenal cortex — Addison's
disease — with other causes including infection, haemorrhage and infiltration.
Because the whole cortex fails, both cortisol and aldosterone are deficient.
And because the low cortisol releases the feedback,
the pituitary secretes increased adrenocorticotropic hormone in an attempt to drive
the failing gland — so the adrenocorticotropic hormone is high,
which also causes the characteristic increased pigmentation of the skin.
In secondary adrenal insufficiency, the adrenal glands are intact,
but they are not driven, because of a lack of the pituitary adrenocorticotropic
hormone — from pituitary disease, or, much more commonly,
the suppression of the axis by prolonged glucocorticoid treatment.
Here the cortisol is deficient, but the aldosterone,
being controlled chiefly by the renin-angiotensin system rather than the pituitary,
is largely preserved; and the adrenocorticotropic hormone is low,
with no pigmentation.
So the distinction matters: primary insufficiency has cortisol and aldosterone
deficiency with a high adrenocorticotropic hormone and pigmentation,
while secondary has cortisol deficiency alone with a low adrenocorticotropic
hormone.
So primary adrenal insufficiency is failure of the adrenal glands themselves —
usually autoimmune — with deficiency of both cortisol and aldosterone and a high
adrenocorticotropic hormone causing pigmentation;
while secondary insufficiency is a lack of pituitary drive — most often from
steroid treatment — with cortisol deficiency but preserved aldosterone and a low
adrenocorticotropic hormone; a distinction of importance for the features and
management.
Describe the adrenal, or Addisonian, crisis and its management.
The adrenal, or Addisonian, crisis is the acute,
life-threatening presentation of adrenal insufficiency,
of great importance because it can be precipitated by stress and is rapidly fatal
if untreated, so it is worth describing.
An adrenal crisis is an acute, severe deficiency of cortisol,
occurring when the cortisol available is grossly inadequate for the body's needs —
either in a patient with adrenal insufficiency subjected to a stress they cannot
meet, or from an acute failure of the adrenals;
it is commonly precipitated by a stress — infection, illness,
injury or surgery — in a patient with known or unrecognised insufficiency,
or whose steroid treatment is inadequate for the stress, or stopped abruptly.
The features arise from the acute lack of cortisol, and, in primary disease,
aldosterone: the dominant and dangerous feature is cardiovascular — a profound
hypotension and shock, from the loss of cortisol's permissive cardiovascular role
and, in primary disease, the volume depletion from aldosterone deficiency — which
is unresponsive to the usual measures and can be fatal;
with other features such as vomiting, abdominal pain, weakness, confusion,
and often hypoglycaemia and electrolyte disturbances.
The management is urgent: the immediate administration of steroid — hydrocortisone
— to replace the missing cortisol; vigorous fluid resuscitation to restore the
volume and support the circulation;
the correction of the hypoglycaemia and electrolyte disturbances;
and the treatment of the precipitating cause.
So an adrenal crisis is an acute, life-threatening cortisol deficiency,
often precipitated by stress in a patient with insufficiency or inadequate steroid
cover; its dominant feature being a profound, refractory hypotension and shock,
from the loss of cortisol's cardiovascular role and the volume depletion,
with hypoglycaemia and electrolyte disturbance; managed urgently with steroid,
vigorous fluid resuscitation, correction of the disturbances and treatment of the
cause — a rapidly fatal emergency if untreated, of great anaesthetic importance.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Each adrenal gland is two glands in one: the cortex (steroid-secreting,
three zones — mineralocorticoids/aldosterone, glucocorticoids/cortisol,
adrenal androgens) and the medulla (a modified sympathetic ganglion secreting
catecholamines — chiefly adrenaline — into the blood).
2.
Cortisol (steroid, made on demand) is controlled by the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis: CRH → pituitary ACTH → adrenal cortex,
with negative feedback; secreted with a circadian rhythm (highest early morning)
and greatly increased by stress (injury, illness, surgery, anaesthesia).
Second, Cortisol acts via intracellular receptors on most tissues:
raises blood glucose (gluconeogenesis + substrate mobilisation, opposing insulin);
permissively maintains cardiovascular function and catecholamine responsiveness;
anti-inflammatory/immunosuppressive (basis of glucocorticoid drugs);
central to the stress response.
Aldosterone (mineralocorticoid) increases renal sodium reabsorption and
potassium/H+ secretion — controlled chiefly by the renin-angiotensin system
(volume/pressure) and plasma potassium, NOT mainly by ACTH.
Third, The adrenal medulla (modified sympathetic ganglion,
preganglionic fibres → ACh on nicotinic receptors) secretes catecholamines (chiefly
adrenaline) into the blood, acting on adrenoceptors throughout the body — the
hormonal arm of the sympathetic response (fight-or-flight).
A catecholamine-secreting tumour (phaeochromocytoma) causes severe hypertension and
is of great anaesthetic importance. Fourth, Adrenocortical insufficiency (primary,
or secondary incl.
steroid-suppressed axes) → weakness, hypoglycaemia,
and critically HYPOTENSION (loss of cortisol's permissive cardiovascular role) ±
sodium loss/hyperkalaemia — the great anaesthetic danger is the Addisonian crisis
when the cortisol response to surgical stress cannot be mounted (prevented by
supplementary steroid cover).
Cushing's
Thank you. That concludes the station.